docs/overview.rst, before:

.. _overview:

Usage overview
==============

The goal of django-soapbox is to provide a simple way to display
persistent messages on either all pages, specific pages, or a subset
of pages on a Django-powered site. To begin using django-soapbox,
simply :ref:`install it <install>`, then add ``soapbox`` to your
``INSTALLED_APPS`` setting and run ``manage.py migrate`` to install
the :class:`Message` model.

You can then begin creating :class:`Message` instances through the
admin interface, indicating which URLs you'd like them to appear on.


Provided models
---------------

.. class:: Message

   The core of django-soapbox is the ``Message`` model, which
   represents messages to be displayed on your site. This model has
   four fields and one important custom method:

   .. attribute:: message

       The actual text of the message to display. This can be plain
       text, or it can include HTML.

   .. attribute:: is_active

       A ``BooleanField`` (defaults to ``True``) indicating whether
       the message is currently active; only active messages will be
       retrieved by the standard helpers built in to django-soapbox.

   .. attribute:: is_global

       A ``BooleanField`` (defaults to ``False``) indicating whether
       the message is global; a global message does not need to have
       :attr:`url` (see below) set, and will match any URL.

   .. attribute:: url

       A field to indicate which URL on your site this message should
       be associated with. Not needed if :attr:`is_global` is
       ``True``.

   .. method:: match(url)

       Return ``True`` if this ``Message`` matches ``url``, ``False``
       otherwise. If ``is_global`` is ``True``, will always return
       ``True``.

.. class:: MessageManager

   Also provided on ``Message`` is a custom manager, accessible as
   ``Message.objects``, which defines two useful methods:

   .. method:: active()

       Returns a ``QuerySet`` of all ``Message`` instances which have
       ``is_active`` set to ``True``. This is defined as a custom
       ``QuerySet`` method, so it can also be "chained" onto other
       ``QuerySets``. For example, the following would retrieve all
       ``Message`` instances which are both global and active:

       .. code-block:: python

           Message.objects.filter(is_global=True).active()

   .. method:: match(url)

       Return a list -- *not* a ``QuerySet`` -- of all ``Message``
       instances which match ``url``.


Message URL matching
--------------------

The message-retrieveal helpers provided in django-soapbox will only
retrieve messages which are active and which match a particular URL
you pass to them; typically, this will be the URL of the current
request. The matching process is case-sensitive and uses the following
algorithm, implemented in the :meth:`~Message.match()` method of
``Message``.

1. If the ``Message`` has ``is_global`` set to ``True``, immediately
   return ``True``.

2. Strip leading and trailing slashes from the URL, and from the
   :attr:`~Message.url` field of the ``Message``, and split each on
   internal slashes to yield a list of path components.

3. If the list of components from the ``url`` field of the ``Message``
   is longer than the list from the passed-in URL, immediately return
   ``False``.

4. Return ``True`` if the list of components from the ``url`` field,
   and the corresponding list of components from the beginning of the
   passed-in URL, are equal. Otherwise, return ``False``.

This means that a ``Message`` will match not only a URL which is an
exact match for its own ``url``, but also any URL of which its ``url``
is a prefix. So, for example, if the ``url`` field contained
``/foo/``, it would match on ``/foo/`` *and* on ``/foo/bar/``.


Retrieving and displaying messages
----------------------------------

There are two helpers built in to django-soapbox for retrieving and
displaying messages in templates.

One is a context processor, which will add a variable
``soapbox_messages`` to the context of any template rendered with a
``RequestContext`` (required in order to have access to the request
path to determine the URL). To enable it, simply add
``soapbox.context_processors.soapbox_messages`` to your
``TEMPLATE_CONTEXT_PROCESSORS`` setting.

If you prefer to have more fine-grained control of where messages will
be retrieved and displayed, django-soapbox provides a template tag,
``get_soapbox_messages`` which can retrieve messages for a given URL
and place them into a variable in the context. The syntax of the tag
is:

.. code-block:: django

    {% get_messages_for_page [url] as [varname] %}

To use the tag, first add ``{% load soapbox %}`` to the template to
load the django-soapbox template tag library, then call the
``get_messages_for_page`` tag, passing a URL -- either a string, or a
template variable which the tag will resolve -- and the name of the
context variable you'd like the message to be placed into. For
example:

.. code-block:: django

    {% load soapbox %}
    {% get_messages_for_page request.path as soapbox_messages %}

    {% for message in soapbox_messages %}
      <p>Important message: {{ message }}</p>
    {% endfor %}


What django-soapbox is not
--------------------------

Importantly, django-soapbox is not a system for displaying one-time
"flash"-type notifications to an individual user; for that, use
`Django's built-in message framework
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/contrib/messages/>`_. It
also is not a system for users to send messages to each other; for
that, email or a custom user-message tool is more appropriate.

Instead, django-soapbox is for displaying messages to *all* users, on
any URLs the messages match, each time they visit those URLs. Most
often this is useful for site-wide or section-specific announcements
all users need to see.


Security considerations
-----------------------

The tools provided in django-soapbox are designed around the
assumption that only trusted administrators of your site will be
permitted to create :class:`Message` instances. In particular, a
``Message`` will, by default, mark its contents as safe for display,
and so the Django template system will *not* perform autoescaping of
the contents. This is useful for allowing HTML messages -- for
example, containing links to longer announcements on their own pages
-- but if opened to arbitrary or untrusted users would be a serious
`cross-site scripting vulnerability
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-site_scripting>`_

Because of this, it is recommended that you only use the Django
administrative interface to create ``Message`` instances, and that you
carefully restrict the ``soapbox.add_message`` permission to only a
small number of trusted administrators.

Commit message:

Document newly-added validation of is_global/url.

docs/overview.rst, after:

.. _overview:

Usage overview
==============

The goal of django-soapbox is to provide a simple way to display
persistent messages on either all pages, specific pages, or a subset
of pages on a Django-powered site. To begin using django-soapbox,
simply :ref:`install it <install>`, then add ``soapbox`` to your
``INSTALLED_APPS`` setting and run ``manage.py migrate`` to install
the :class:`Message` model.

You can then begin creating :class:`Message` instances through the
admin interface, indicating which URLs you'd like them to appear on.


Provided models
---------------

.. class:: Message

   The core of django-soapbox is the ``Message`` model, which
   represents messages to be displayed on your site. This model has
   four fields and one important custom method:

   .. attribute:: message

       The actual text of the message to display. This can be plain
       text, or it can include HTML.

   .. attribute:: is_active

       A ``BooleanField`` (defaults to ``True``) indicating whether
       the message is currently active; only active messages will be
       retrieved by the standard helpers built in to django-soapbox.

   .. attribute:: is_global

       A ``BooleanField`` (defaults to ``False``) indicating whether
       the message is global; a global message does not need to have
       :attr:`url` (see below) set, and will match any URL.

   .. attribute:: url

       A field to indicate which URL on your site this message should
       be associated with. Not needed if :attr:`is_global` is
       ``True``.

   .. method:: match(url)

       Return ``True`` if this ``Message`` matches ``url``, ``False``
       otherwise. If ``is_global`` is ``True``, will always return
       ``True``.

.. class:: MessageManager

   Also provided on ``Message`` is a custom manager, accessible as
   ``Message.objects``, which defines two useful methods:

   .. method:: active()

       Returns a ``QuerySet`` of all ``Message`` instances which have
       ``is_active`` set to ``True``. This is defined as a custom
       ``QuerySet`` method, so it can also be "chained" onto other
       ``QuerySets``. For example, the following would retrieve all
       ``Message`` instances which are both global and active:

       .. code-block:: python

           Message.objects.filter(is_global=True).active()

   .. method:: match(url)

       Return a list -- *not* a ``QuerySet`` -- of all ``Message``
       instances which match ``url``.


Validation requirements
-----------------------

While ``Message`` instances are relatively freeform, there are two
requirements you must abide by; failure to do so will result in
validation errors being raised when trying to save the ``Message``:

1. Each ``Message`` must either have :attr:`~Message.is_global` set to
   ``True``, or specify some URL prefix to match in
   :attr:`~Message.url`.

2. A ``Message`` cannot have both :attr:`~Message.is_global` set to
   ``True`` and simultaneously have a URL prefix to match specified in
   :attr:`~Message.url` (in other words, a ``Message`` can be global,
   or "local" to some URL prefix, but never both at the same time).


Message URL matching
--------------------

The message-retrieveal helpers provided in django-soapbox will only
retrieve messages which are active and which match a particular URL
you pass to them; typically, this will be the URL of the current
request. The matching process is case-sensitive and uses the following
algorithm, implemented in the :meth:`~Message.match()` method of
``Message``.

1. If the ``Message`` has ``is_global`` set to ``True``, immediately
   return ``True``.

2. Strip leading and trailing slashes from the URL, and from the
   :attr:`~Message.url` field of the ``Message``, and split each on
   internal slashes to yield a list of path components.

3. If the list of components from the ``url`` field of the ``Message``
   is longer than the list from the passed-in URL, immediately return
   ``False``.

4. Return ``True`` if the list of components from the ``url`` field,
   and the corresponding list of components from the beginning of the
   passed-in URL, are equal. Otherwise, return ``False``.

This means that a ``Message`` will match not only a URL which is an
exact match for its own ``url``, but also any URL of which its ``url``
is a prefix. So, for example, if the ``url`` field contained
``/foo/``, it would match on ``/foo/`` *and* on ``/foo/bar/``.


Retrieving and displaying messages
----------------------------------

There are two helpers built in to django-soapbox for retrieving and
displaying messages in templates.

One is a context processor, which will add a variable
``soapbox_messages`` to the context of any template rendered with a
``RequestContext`` (required in order to have access to the request
path to determine the URL). To enable it, simply add
``soapbox.context_processors.soapbox_messages`` to your
``TEMPLATE_CONTEXT_PROCESSORS`` setting.

If you prefer to have more fine-grained control of where messages will
be retrieved and displayed, django-soapbox provides a template tag,
``get_soapbox_messages`` which can retrieve messages for a given URL
and place them into a variable in the context. The syntax of the tag
is:

.. code-block:: django

    {% get_messages_for_page [url] as [varname] %}

To use the tag, first add ``{% load soapbox %}`` to the template to
load the django-soapbox template tag library, then call the
``get_messages_for_page`` tag, passing a URL -- either a string, or a
template variable which the tag will resolve -- and the name of the
context variable you'd like the message to be placed into. For
example:

.. code-block:: django

    {% load soapbox %}
    {% get_messages_for_page request.path as soapbox_messages %}

    {% for message in soapbox_messages %}
      <p>Important message: {{ message }}</p>
    {% endfor %}


What django-soapbox is not
--------------------------

Importantly, django-soapbox is not a system for displaying one-time
"flash"-type notifications to an individual user; for that, use
`Django's built-in message framework
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/contrib/messages/>`_. It
also is not a system for users to send messages to each other; for
that, email or a custom user-message tool is more appropriate.

Instead, django-soapbox is for displaying messages to *all* users, on
any URLs the messages match, each time they visit those URLs. Most
often this is useful for site-wide or section-specific announcements
all users need to see.


Security considerations
-----------------------

The tools provided in django-soapbox are designed around the
assumption that only trusted administrators of your site will be
permitted to create :class:`Message` instances. In particular, a
``Message`` will, by default, mark its contents as safe for display,
and so the Django template system will *not* perform autoescaping of
the contents. This is useful for allowing HTML messages -- for
example, containing links to longer announcements on their own pages
-- but if opened to arbitrary or untrusted users would be a serious
`cross-site scripting vulnerability
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-site_scripting>`_

Because of this, it is recommended that you only use the Django
administrative interface to create ``Message`` instances, and that you
carefully restrict the ``soapbox.add_message`` permission to only a
small number of trusted administrators.
